Lets see the steps involved in making a machine learning models

1.Problem Statement
2.Data Collection
3.Exploratary Data analysis
4.Data preprocessing?Cleaning
5.Feature Selection
6.Split the Dataset
7.Model Selection
8.Model training
9.Model evaluation
10.HyperParameter Tuninig
11.Model Testing / Validation

What is Exploratary data analysis


Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) is an important step in data analysis where we explore, summarize, and visualize data to understand its structure, detect patterns, identify anomalies, test assumptions, and check relationships between variables before applying any machine learning or statistical models.

1.View Data - shape(),info(),describe(),head(),tail(),columns,rows
2.summarize Data - Find mean,median,mode,std,max,min,variance. Helps to understand the spred of data
3.Value Count - Identify unique values,Categorical columns,numerical columns
4.Missing Value Analysis - Identifinf null and missing values to treat them
5.visualization - Histogram - Distribution of values 
                  Boxplot - Outliers 
                  Barplot - Comparison 
                  Heatmap - Linear Coreelation between numerical features
                  scatterplot - bivariate relationships
6.Target Exploration analysis 


Parts of EDA -

1.Data Cleaning -a. Handle missing values (nulls) like droping or filling them by mean , mode,median or any other value
                 b. Removing duplicates - droping duplicates
                 c. Fixing data types - conversion correctly
                 d. Handling inconsistent Values - Like we can write 'Male','Male','M' , nut we need to operate and make consistent values 
                 e. Detect and handle outliers  - We need to treat outliers by exploring them
                 g. Handling illogical and invlaid value - height/age cant be -10,9999999

2.Data preprocessing - Data preprocessing is the process to convert the raw data into machine learning feedable data .
                       So basically we are converting the data into machine can learn and unnderstand it easily

                    1. Encoding Categorical data - Lets say we have 'male' or 'yes' machine cant undertsand such text so 
                    we need to convert it into numbers

                    2. Feature Transfornation - Handling the skewed data 
                    
                    
                    3.Scaling , is the process use to equilate the features or input varaibles so the machine learining ,model would be accurate 

                    ex. if the model has input of age and salary , so the ages like 28,29,31,21,20 and salary would be like ,20000,30000,23000 so now you can ibesrve the huge diffrence which manipulate and the mathematical algorithm and can be inaccurate the model. 

                    so what the scaling does is that it scale the features in same format like 0.1,0.2,0.11 etc.

                     a.Min-Max scaling - between 0 and 1
                     b.Z-scpre scaling - std 0 - 1

